Good afternoon, dear colleagues. I am Oleg Boksansky, Professor of the Russian Economic Academy named after Georgy Plokhanov.
I teach MBA courses in general management, management of organizations, management of human resources, and I am a consultant in the field of HR consulting.
The topic of our meeting is management. We will discuss the main categories and approaches that exist in modern management,
and also, in conclusion, we will focus on the trends of development that are present in the 21st century of management applicants.
When we start talking about management, this topic has a long history, and in fact, all business success, all commercial success,
are associated with successful organization of the process itself, with successful organization of the management process to achieve the goals that are before the company.
Our task within this topic is, firstly, to get acquainted with the history of the emergence of management as a scientific discipline,
secondly, to clarify the main concepts that are applied today, that have proven their effectiveness, that have proven their success, and that really give results.
And the third task, as we have already said, will be to get acquainted with the prospects of management.
Management does not stand still, it constantly develops, constantly changes, because it is forced to respond to the needs and requests of the external environment that are presented to it.
And that is why only those who achieve success in business, who react very subtly and with caution to the problems that arise in the market,
and who are able to foresee the methods of impact, the results, the management approaches that will prove their effectiveness, not now, but tomorrow, the day after tomorrow.
This is the success of the achievements of those businessmen who have achieved outstanding results.
When we talk about management, the first question that arises is related to the definition. What will we understand about management?
This is a rather difficult question, because it can be approached from two points of view.
The first point of view is to give some academic definition.
We can open a large number of textbooks, and textbooks written by famous authors, who have undisputed and undisputed authority in this field,
and see that each of these authors gives, albeit similar, but in some way different definition of management,
and makes emphasis on different directions and approaches.
Let's focus on the practically significant, practically applicable, practically verifiable definition of management.
And then, when we will consider the formation of management, different theoretical approaches that are implemented in management,
different achievements that are in management, then, accordingly, we will fill this definition with a specific meaning,
in order not to indulge in any other academic nuances.
Let's, within the framework of our meeting today, within the framework of considering the material of the topic,
within the framework of considering the material of the course, we will consider management as a management of social-economic and social-technical systems,
which has as its goal to obtain a specific result.
What is important to pay attention to in this definition?
First of all, it is about systems.
Modern management is a kind of system organization.
There are no autonomous elements, no separate independent parts, independent blocks,
which we can put together and get a certain management structure.
Management is a system.
This is the first and fundamental basis on which we should pay attention.
Next.
As for management, this management is primarily carried out by people,
it encompasses people, and, accordingly, all management has a social structure, a social basis.
Naturally, this social basis is primarily economic.
We are talking about business, we are talking about commerce, we are talking about economic relations that arise in this process.
But, in addition to these economic achievements, we are also talking about technical achievements.
If we are talking about production, then, accordingly, we should consider the problem of technical devices,
machines, machines on which telecommerce products are produced.
If we are talking about services, then these services are also based on different technical achievements.
Therefore, we will highlight in management both social-economic relations and social-technical relations.
These are all the relations that exist in society.
These are all the relations that have their own hierarchy, their own pattern.
These are all the relations that are realized by people, between people, and which are realized in the process of our social interaction.
But, again, we are talking about management from a practical point of view.
We need to acquire the skills of applying these or other concepts of management,
these or other management approaches, so that we can implement them in our everyday business activities.
Our business activity is always oriented towards the result.
We can build plans, we can build prospects, but these will be plans and prospects for achieving a specific final result.
There is no business for the sake of a strategy, there is no business for the sake of some distant, clouded goals.
These are some ideological moments, and this is what not businessmen do, but what politicians do.
Every business is focused on the result, because the result is essentially the achievement that we have achieved.
And then, when we bring this result to the market, then the position that is occupied by this market,
the segmentation of the market that is taking place, the income that we receive,
they testify whether we have achieved a profitable result, or even the most wonderful management,
the most wonderful managerial relations and the wonderful psychological climate in the team,
turned out to be ineffective, because the result that we have achieved is not in demand.
Accordingly, the result is the important third feature that we will have in mind in management.
So, the first thing is that management is always a system.
The second thing is that management always has a social value, because it is associated with the relationships of people.
Moreover, these are economic and technical relations, like the material basis on which management is implemented.
And the third thing is the result. Only management, only those approaches in management that implement all these three features,
turn out to be productive. In fact, these are the three basic, main points that we need to know,
we need to remember when we make any management decision.
If we do not pay attention to any of these three aspects, or we miss attention to this point,
we level it, then, unfortunately, it will lead not to the results that we want.
As you understand, I do not stop at this for a long time, because I would like us to come to the conclusion
that management is a certain professional activity.
Management is not the result of common sense, it is not what is given by God, what a person shows.
Management is a daily, long-term work, and it is the professional activity that is expensive.
Moreover, it is a professional activity, it concerns management of all processes built into organizations.
And, what is also very important to pay attention to, business is always the situation that is realized in the conditions of risk and uncertainty.
Unfortunately, or fortunately, we never know for sure what results we will get,
and how much those plans that we have set for ourselves, how much those business plans that we have written down for ourselves will be realized.
In the end, it is very difficult to take into account all that huge set of relations that is around the business.
And very often we have to take risks, it is twofold.
Either our risk is justified and we make a leap, and, in principle, what concerns the undisputed business achievements,
it has always been a certain risk.
This is the risk that Henry Ford had, this is the risk that Bill Gates had, this is the risk that Fayol had,
what we will talk about today.
And when they began to deal with their own questions, each with their own topic,
and each of them did not know who we would study after 100 years, and who we would forget and not even remember.
At the same time, in addition to the risk, there is a significant element of uncertainty.
Again, if we put new goods on the market, if we try to build a new service,
it is not always clear how much it will be in demand.
We can make the most wonderful product, but it will not be in demand,
because either the advertising will be poorly done, or the psychology of the consumer will not be taken into account.
This is a very important point that we will also talk about and which the manager and management specialist should also consider.
So, all this situation is associated with uncertainty.
This is a situation where either we are on a horse, or we need to start all over again,
and the funds that we have invested may not be repaid.
I think I do not need to talk about this in more detail for you, people who do business every day.
At the same time, in order to function normally in a situation of risk and uncertainty,
the manager must have some freedom.
Here, an administrative approach is not allowed, when you have a plan and you have to do exactly as it is written.
It is not allowed because the documents are written once and for all.
They reflect some of the conditions that were before, but these documents do not reflect the changes that are now.
Accordingly, if we work on the basis of the past, we remain in the past.
Only those who achieve success in business, only those who are successful managers,
who react very subtly and subtly to the everyday changes that are happening,
and for this you need a certain freedom in making both strategic and tactical decisions.
Because it determines the direction in which economic investment will be made,
the direction in which a particular production system will be built,
a particular operating system, where certain or other prospects will be determined.
And the manager must take all this into account, he must understand all this,
and accordingly he is given a certain degree of freedom,
but for this degree of freedom he must pay for the achievement of the end results.
It is all these circumstances that show that a manager must represent himself and represents himself
in the whole civilized world a professional sphere of activity,
which must be studied for a long time, first of all, at the university,
getting basic knowledge of theory, but the main thing is that all achievements,
all success of a manager is associated with our specific experience.
We can all read the same books, but we will all apply them in different ways,
and we will all get different results.
This is the most expensive thing that is called experience,
which is the essential basis of professionalism.
We have now determined the understanding of management,
which will be present in our presentation today.
Let's now focus on the main functions of management.
We have considered its main characteristics, its tasks,
the conditions in which it is implemented, the conditions of risk, management,
the conditions of freedom of choice, tactical and strategic decisions
for achieving the desired result.
Let's now move on to the functional consideration of management,
because management is, first of all, a system of relations,
and this system has some functions.
There is no management at all.
Management should always be specific.
As for the function of management, different authors highlight different functions.
Again, this is natural, we have discussed this with you.
But from a pragmatic point of view, from the point of view of our daily business tasks,
which we must solve from the point of view of organizing any business processes,
we can highlight four main functions of management.
In fact, these are the functions that are highlighted by different authors.
They can be called differently, they can be given in different order.
This is not so important, because we need to consider the functional tasks
and each of them, depending on the tasks that are in front of it,
depending on the conditions on the market that exist,
will highlight those or other functions from the point of view of their priorities,
from the point of view of their importance.
The question is that management should include all these four functions.
Just at every specific moment, in every specific situation,
each of these functions can have a more important meaning.
Another meaning can wait, not cancel, not disappear,
but simply reorient itself from the point of view of their priorities.
As for the function of management, as we have already discussed,
planning is of great importance.
Management is a system of management relationships that arise between people
that are oriented to the production that exists.
Therefore, management is associated with planning of activities.
I have to organize the planning of people's busyness.
I have to organize the planning of the busyness of production.
I have to organize the planning of providing the implementation of a particular service.
Accordingly, when we talk about planning,
it is the tactical, close and strategic long-term goals that we set for ourselves.
Because depending on the goals, the plans, the tasks I set for myself,
I will have a further management system.
Therefore, planning is a certain perspective that I need to achieve
and the steps of achieving this perspective.
These are not just plans that I will set.
This is not a certain result that I have previously developed,
for example, a state plan for a five-year, ten-year or something else.
Planning is the desired result and the ways, methods, steps, operations to achieve it.
It is very important that the result does not detract from practice.
You can set the most remarkable result,
doubling of the internal product, triple, and so on,
but until specific ways of this achievement are prescribed,
and the ways that are implemented,
again, not some ideal schemes that can be read in any textbook,
but really those methods that are able to be achieved.
So, planning.
After we have planned the activity,
planned certain perspectives, certain approaches, certain tasks,
the stage of organization comes,
the organization of achieving these plans.
The plan only then matters,
I have already emphasized and I will emphasize it again,
because for business it is a fundamental approach.
The plan only then matters when there are ways of its achievement.
But after these ways are prescribed,
it is necessary to organize their material achievements, their implementation.
The plan can be the most remarkable,
the ways of its achievement can also be remarkably prescribed,
but its execution, the execution of the plan,
the achievement of the results is carried out by people.
The achievement of the results should always be tied to people,
both to the manufacturers and to the suppliers,
and in the end to those who will use these results,
that is, for whom this whole business scheme is completed.
As for the organization, the execution of the results,
organizational management,
perhaps this is one of the most difficult tasks of management,
because this is the practice of achieving results.
This is direct work with people,
this is a direct organization of production,
this is a direct conclusion,
the exit to the market of those or other results that were obtained.
We will talk about this more than once.
The next function of management is, of course, the function of motivation.
We work with people, this is the original idea that should be constantly kept in mind.
We do not work with money, not with machines,
we work with people, with their desires, needs, abilities,
with their desire to get something, with their laziness, with their ambitions.
We work with real people,
and these people need to be motivated to solve the tasks that we have set for them,
that we have planned for them, that we have organized for their execution.
And it is necessary to achieve that people are motivated to achieve the results
that are ahead of them.
They sabotaged them, they tried to get rid of them, they worked with a cold.
I think that the problem of motivation is something that everyone is well aware of.
How to motivate a person?
Is one salary enough?
Or do you need some additional results?
Bonuses, payment of loans, medical care.
Is material stimulation enough?
Or do we need non-material stimulation?
All of this is also a significant function of management,
because a successful management result,
a successful system of building relationships in an organization,
is determined by motivation.
A well-organized motivation allows you to get long-term results.
A well-organized motivation allows you to avoid current frameworks.
A well-organized motivation allows you to achieve a re-execution of plans
and, accordingly, to get more and more results,
which will strengthen the position of the company in the market,
to help promote its brand and to get the desired results for the company.
And, of course, when we talk about management functions,
we should pay attention to its function as a control.
Indeed, we can build wonderful plans with all the conditions we talked about.
We can organize the whole system of execution of these plans.
We can build a great motivation system.
But we need to control all these actions, all these results.
Do they lead us to the final result we want to achieve?
Because we can get a lot of intermediate results.
A good motivation can lead to the growth of loyalty of the company employees,
to the division of their missions in the company.
They will not formally carry out their duties,
but the results that will be obtained in the end
will differ from the initial tasks that were before us.
Somewhere there was a failure or a deviation.
And we need a constant feedback at every stage.
At the stage of planning, at the stage of organization, at the stage of motivation.
We must constantly control the current results
with the final results that we have determined for ourselves,
which we have set as the organizers of the production,
as managers, as the owners of a particular business.
And as for the control, this is also a very delicate point.
There are different forms of control, which we will talk about in a moment.
And this control should not be something like a supervisor.
As for the control, we are not only talking about tracking the implementation of the tasks,
but also about identifying mistakes, identifying difficulties that arise along the way,
analyzing these difficulties and, accordingly, correcting them.
In this case, the control receives a wide field of distribution,
which is not only related to tracking the accuracy of the result,
but also to modification, adaptation of this result,
adding of certain resources.
Because we work in a situation of risk, in a situation of uncertainty.
And, accordingly, we do not always know what difficulties we have encountered.
If we encounter difficulties, then control is needed
so that we can solve this difficulty, level it, disavow it as early as possible,
until it leads to a stop of production,
when it leads to the failure of the brand on the market, and so on.
Control should not be all-encompassing and constant.
Control should be optimal, it should be productive,
it should be progressive from the point of view that it is aimed at achieving
the ultimate goal that is before any management.
Achieving the result that was set, for which the business is organized,
for which efforts are made, funds are invested,
for which people working in this industry are working.
So, these are the main management functions,
which are traditionally highlighted in it.
And usually, few practitioners will argue with these functions.
As for the theorists, they also agree with these functions.
Just as I have already noted, different nuances, different aspects are highlighted in different functions.
This, however, depends on the specific production, on the specific tasks that we face.
So, this is what concerns the basic management positions,
how we will consider them, and the functions that we will face in management.
The next task that is before us is a task related to getting acquainted
with the main approaches that are implemented in management.
As for these approaches, they have been proposed a lot in the 200-year history of management development.
But we will focus on those that have proven their effectiveness,
their ability to organize and manage production,
and which are used now, among other things.
These are the approaches that are effective.
The main approaches that were proposed in management in the 21st century are presented on this table,
which you can see on the slide.
And, accordingly, we will focus on these approaches.
As for management thinking, it covers the period from the end of the 19th century to the end of the 20th century,
to the beginning of the 21st century.
And we can see that each of the proposed approaches takes a certain period of time.
Please note that these periods of time are decades, not a year or two months.
These are decades, sometimes even half a century,
during which certain or other positions are tested, which are typical of each approach.
Let's now go through this table and see how these approaches are interconnected,
how each of these approaches is a certain starting point for the next approach.
Why do these approaches arise one after another?
They are mostly in a sequence, because first there is a certain approach.
It has some positive results, and it begins to be implemented, it begins to be used.
But as it is implemented, as it is used, its limitations are revealed.
On the one hand, new socio-economic conditions arise.
Remember the definition of management that we gave.
Different socio-technical conditions arise.
Again, let's remember, we give the definition of management.
Systemic relations that exist between people, that exist between manufacturers, change.
And, accordingly, the need for the final result that we want to achieve changes.
Accordingly, those or other achievements that were achieved in management should be modified, modernized, and adapted.
No matter how good they are, management is a fundamentally dynamic system.
If management becomes static, it is doomed, because all processes are constantly changing.
And there is no need to look for these decisions once and for all.
Unfortunately, they do not exist.
Or, let's be more careful, in any case, there are still no unambiguous, just approaches in all times and for all circumstances.
Well, maybe they will not be found further, then we will consider and study them.
So, let's now consider these approaches that are presented here.
The emergence of management as a scientific discipline is connected with the name of Frederick Winslow Taylor.
And as for Taylor, he was actually the founder of management as a kind of professional activity.
Again, remember when we talked about, gave a definition of management, we emphasized that management is primarily a professional activity.
So, the first person who paid attention to this, the first person who made management a profession, was Taylor.
Taylor lived in the 19th century, the main part of his life took place in the 19th century.
He was born in 1856, died in 1915.
And this time was characterized by the development of industry, the emergence and establishment of capitalist economic relations.
And therefore, the task arose, the need arose to analyze, to structure those new economic relations that arise.
To a significant extent, this was done by economists.
But as for Taylor, he was again a practitioner.
And it was Taylor who drew attention to the fact that to a significant extent, if we want to get a specific result in production, in service,
then in a certain way it is necessary to organize the working conditions.
There are different factories, and Taylor, of course, saw it all.
These factories can have the same equipment, the same number of people can work at these factories.
But the result at the output of each of these factories is different.
Why?
The machines are the same.
Well, people are different, of course, but on the other hand, these are people who work on machines.
The number of factory indicators is the same, the result is different.
Why?
It is quite possible that this situation is due to the fact that it is necessary to look for a problem in people.
The machines are the same, people are different.
But as for Taylor, he did not consider the problem of motivation of specific people.
He drew attention to the fact that a lot, from the point of view of business, from the point of view of the final result,
determines how management is organized by these people.
How well they know what to do, when to do it, under what conditions to do it, in what order to do it,
depending on how their working day is organized, how many breaks they have, when they have a lunch break,
how the interaction between these people is organized, how the management of these people is organized.
Based on his observations, Taylor realized that the final economic results that will be obtained depend on the administration.
It is the administration, because the administration in the 19th century was engaged in management.
It was the administration in the 19th century, the administration of factories, that decided the main functions that stood before it.
The function of planning, the function of organization, the function of motivation and the function of control.
Depending on how this or that function is implemented, how the corresponding tasks are solved,
which are in front of the managers, different results are obtained.
Taylor decided that if we can find the patterns of the management,
then these patterns significantly determine the final results that we strive for.
In this regard, Taylor proposed the concept of scientific management.
The fact is that what concerns the 19th century, in the 19th century there was a development of science,
and therefore science emphasized the truthfulness, the resultiveness of the approach.
From this point of view, Taylor introduced and formulated the system of organization of scientific management,
or what became very well known as the scientific organization of labor.
It is related to the name of Taylor, he introduced these positions in the 19th century.
As for this approach, Taylor assumes that it is the administration that takes on the task of developing the scientific foundation of management.
I, as the owner, will decide how the organization of labor interaction will be built,
how the interaction with the manufacturers will be built, how the interaction with suppliers will be built.
Moreover, if I want to get a result that suits me, I must base it on some scientific principles.
The scientific principles of those that Taylor proposes in his research.
As for Taylor, he left the practice.
His achievements, his work was related to the fact that he observed the activities of workers,
the activities of the leaders of these workers, and, accordingly, he identified those approaches, those methods,
those actions that led to the desired results, and those actions that hindered the achievement of the result,
that led to disorganization of production, that led to various difficulties and failure of certain plans.
Taylor was based on these scientifically established facts,
the facts that science has highlighted, science of the 19th century,
and, in fact, the facts that Taylor called the scientific organization of labor.
So, if the administration selects workers for production, for those or other machines, based on these scientific results,
it will contribute to the achievement of the final result, for which the production is carried out.
In the end, the owner invests money to get the desired return, to get profit,
and, accordingly, to have the opportunity to expand the production to get even more profit.
But it was Taylor who drew attention to the fact that it is not enough for us to simply select workers.
It is not enough to select those who will work on machines.
It is necessary to organize the training of these workers, first, and, secondly, to develop the abilities that each worker has.
On a machine, you can work at different speeds.
In the end, you can adapt to work on this machine in such a way to get more results,
to get rid of trauma, to get rid of all sorts of difficulties that arise.
To organize what today was called the safety technique.
It also refers to Taylor, who drew attention to this.
If our management system, our production management system,
is organized in terms of adequate selection of employees,
who will later be trained, and we train them, and develop them in terms of working in certain conditions,
then we can be sure that we will not just get the desired result,
but this result will even exceed our expectations.
Taylor in the 19th century. This is very important.
Today, many of Taylor's ideas, which I am talking about now, are obvious.
They are already being studied in management from the very beginning.
They are already given as the most obvious things, because otherwise it cannot be so.
But this is today. Taylor received his results in the 19th century,
when there was a completely different attitude to production and to the tasks that were faced,
when capitalist and economic relations were only affirmed.
So, from Taylor's point of view, if the administration, management,
performs trustworthy cooperation with the workers in the direction of achieving certain goals,
then we will get even better results.
In this case, the task is to motivate the workers to work.
Again, remember the management functions that we talked about.
In fact, it is Taylor who pays attention to the need for motivation.
But perhaps he was the first to bring all this into the system,
because it is not for nothing that the scientific management begins with him.
Finally, Taylor draws attention to the need to distribute responsibility between management and workers.
Everyone is responsible for their own sector of activity.
The workers are engaged in the performance of production, they produce something.
And the administration is engaged in the management.
But all this is very interconnected.
It is pointless to lead by an unknown name and to perform something against the guidance.
Only if the workers and the managers move in the same direction,
if the executive and management functions of the workers and the responsibility of each of them for their own sector are distributed between them,
only in this case, under these conditions, we can get the desired result.
Let's say, Taylor's achievements were his achievements.
And that is why Taylor is considered the father of scientific management.
They all had practical applications and gave fast practical results.
As for the 19th century, during this period of rapid industrial development,
some phenomena arose that did not please the owners of enterprises.
One of these phenomena is restrictionism.
That is, working with a coolant.
The worker comes and starts working at the machine, getting some results, but he does not show activity.
He is on duty, and, accordingly, he has no initiative to work better,
to do what was called a rationalization proposal,
to use all the potential opportunities that a particular machine gives him.
Again, pay attention to the fact that this is the 19th century.
Machines are just emerging, they are modernizing,
and, accordingly, there are no standards or prospects of this or that activity.
And what does the worker want?
The worker, of course, wants to be less busy, to get more.
And that is why Taylor comes from the fact that this is the cause of restrictionism.
In order to get rid of it, we must motivate the workers,
we must organize planning correctly,
and we must control every step of the implementation of this or that activity.
So far, every step is a stop of management.
Flexibility is the next stage of its development, which we will talk about later.
As for Taylor, he not only explained the phenomenon of restrictionism,
but also proposed ways to eliminate it, to overcome it, which worked.
At those enterprises, at those factories where Taylor's scientific organization was implemented,
the results were more than remarkable compared to other factories.
As for Taylor, he also proposed a system of organizational measures,
which was aimed at improving the results, improving the production.
He introduced chronometry, which is a time measurement necessary for each operation.
Taylor was the person who proposed to divide the process of work on the machine
into specific operational stages, to measure the time that the worker spends on each operation,
and then to see which of these operations slows down the final activity,
where the worker needs assistants, where something needs to be changed,
where some changes in the machine itself can be made.
This chronometry, or what is now called a work time photo,
is all that was proposed by Taylor.
Taylor also proposed to introduce instruction cards,
that is, in fact, what is now called a safety technique.
You come to work, and the first thing you are given is a list of actions that you must perform,
that you must not perform.
In fact, these are instructions that ensure, on the one hand,
the preservation of your life and health, as a safety technique,
and on the other hand, the preservation of equipment and the increase of the results of production,
in terms of production, in terms of the supply of services.
Taylor proposed to create so-called planning offices,
which would plan the work of people on certain technical means.
It would be easier to work on some machines,
because there are simpler operations,
and some machines are associated with more complex tasks, with greater complexity.
So what happened very often?
A huge number of blanks accumulated after some machines,
which the workers, in other words, simply did not have time to process.
It was the planning offices that were recognized in order to match the number of machines.
If, for example, one machine gives 100 blanks in an hour,
and the second machine, processing this blank after the first machine,
is able to process only 50 parts in an hour,
let's put two machines.
And accordingly, then two machines will be able to work with the same 100 parts.
There will be no stoppage of the previous machines.
These are all the tasks that were solved by the planning office.
And in fact, today it all exists as a matter of course.
But at the time when Taylor proposed it, when Taylor implemented it,
these were the methods that contributed to the colossal rise of the results
that were at those factories.
So, this is what concerns scientific management or the formation of management.
This is what concerns Taylor's contribution.
And in fact, he is considered the father of modern management.
Because almost all the ideas that we talked about today,
are what are used now.
This is what is already perceived without a doubt.
At the time, 100 years ago, Taylor had to make a lot of effort
to prove to the owners of those or other factories the need for these changes.
After all, all this at one time was a serious investment in additional production.
Naturally, the capitalist is interested in investing only if he is confident in the return.
What Taylor proposed, in fact, were many points related to the work with the staff.
At that time, in the 19th century, working with the staff was not yet something significant.
And it was believed that the main thing was technical support.
We will always find people.
In fact, it was Taylor who made the first impact on this idea.
He can also be considered the founder of various concepts of management and human resources.
The implementation of Taylor's scientific management ideas took 30-40 years.
Gradually, they were introduced into production.
Gradually, they began to dominate both in Europe and in America.
But at the same time, it became obvious that the results Taylor got in the late 19th and early 20th centuries
were not quite adequate.
After all, they required an update in the early 20th century.
Because the administration itself changed, the production itself changed,
the people who work in the production changed, the social-economic relations changed,
the social-technical systems that exist changed,
the requirements for the specific results that were obtained changed.
And the need for an expansion of the concept of management,
further development of Taylor's ideas, not to abandon them.
These are very important aspects that I have already addressed and again draw your attention to.
Not to abandon Taylor's ideas, that is, time has passed, they have worked out their own, now they need to be replaced.
Not to replace, but to add those or other concepts, to modernize those or other approaches,
to change the terminology, to change the requirements, to change the tasks, to change the conditions.
And this was implemented in the classical school of management.
As for Taylor, it is a school of scientific management,
because he set the task of achieving a scientific justification for the concept of management.
Now, after he set this task and decided, and scientific management was introduced into production,
the next school emerged, or the school of classical management.
Classical, because this school emerged at the stage of a fairly widely developed capitalist production,
capitalist economic relations.
And, accordingly, those ideas, those approaches, those principles that were laid down in the classical school,
that were based on Taylor's scientific management,
are the foundations on which any system of existing management is built today.
This is a classic in the sense that it is an idea that justified itself and its approach.
The development of the classical school was associated with different names,
but both the scientific management associated with Taylor and the classical school associated with Foyol,
who developed the classical principles of management.
Or the principles of classical management.
This is what is written in any textbook today, and in almost every book that is offered to you in the list of literature,
you will come across both Taylor and Foyol, and the principles that are laid down there.
Again, as for Foyol, he highlighted many principles.
In our discussion and analysis today, we will focus on those principles that are as relevant today,
or even more relevant than they were 100 years ago, when Foyol highlighted them, considered them, justified them, and implemented them.
As for the classical principles of management, Foyol is associated with the idea of division of labor.
We should not strive for working universals that can do any operation, any detail.
As the growth of production, as the growth of other production activities is getting more and more complicated,
we need what is called narrow professionalism.
We need division of labor in such a way that certain operations are performed professionally.
This idea was proposed and considered by Foyol, and it was implemented.
This is why the emphasis was placed on the idea of universality, so that each worker could replace another.
Foyol noticed that this is good, but in the end it turns out that we can replace another,
but this is achieved by losing certain qualities, certain speed, certain time in each production site.
If we divide all production into component parts, into component operations,
and we orient workers to professional mastering of narrow sites,
then in the end, when the composition of certain parts takes place,
we will get a much better quality result, which will have a higher value.
The next principle of management, which Foyol highlights, concerns power and responsibility.
In this case, power is understood as control.
Again, let's recall the management functions that we discussed.
But it was Foyol who noticed that the management power,
that is, the control function of management, implies responsibility.
Because there is a goal of an activity, there is a path to its achievement.
The task of a manager is to control the movement to this goal,
but it cannot be controlled formally, in general terms.
If I control a certain process,
then I take responsibility for the fact that the organization of this process
should give the intermediate results, which will eventually lead to the final result.
Again, today this is an obvious thing, but in the days of Foyol,
it was precisely the power that was discussed as control.
And the manager should not be responsible, he should simply control.
And what are the results of this control?
What are the results of the management decisions that are made?
This is what he did not pay attention to.
But Foyol concluded that power should not be for the sake of power.
I am a manager, and therefore I manage.
But power should be for the sake of the final result,
for the sake of the intermediate result, to achieve the final result.
And accordingly, the manager takes responsibility
for achieving the results that he controls.
The next principle of management is discipline.
I don't think that anything should be added here.
Besides, when Foyol talked about discipline,
in the early 20th century, Foyol,
discipline was, again, only for the lower level,
for the linear employees, for the workers.
So Foyol drew attention to the fact that discipline is not only
what the workers should do, but also what concerns the managers themselves.
That is, the manager should also obey discipline,
the management discipline.
And this just means, depending on the previous point,
that the manager takes responsibility for the results he gives.
And this is where the idea of giving an example comes from.
In the sense that depending on how the manager behaves,
it determines the attitude towards him,
and most importantly, the final results that his management activity will have.
The next principle is the principle of initiation.
A very important principle, and it concerns...
Of course, this principle was transferred from the military order,
but Foyol drew attention to the biggest trouble of production.
Again, as for Foyol, this is the beginning of the 20th century,
and he was engaged in more production,
production of some material products, but not services.
Although, again, all those principles that we are now considering
are applicable to the management of the services.
So, as for Foyol, he drew attention to the fact that
the biggest trouble of production is that there are a lot of managers.
The director of the plant, his deputy, department managers,
managers of management, managers of workshops, managers of shifts,
managers of the district, and so on.
Everyone wants to manage, everyone wants to show their power as a control,
and, accordingly, it often turns out that people give contradictory orders.
And, accordingly, there is a problem of how to combine all this into a single whole.
That is why Foyol drew attention to the fact that
there should be a single principle, and at the same time,
the next principle is that there should be a certain line of power.
As they say today, it is fashionable to call it the vertical power.
Foyol called it the line of power, or, since it was about production,
since it was about scientific approach to management,
he called it the scalar chain.
The scalar chain is a sequence of elements.
Each subsequent element should be oriented to what is in front of it.
This is the principle that Foyol and his mechanism speak about.
The common goal is set, and then different lower-rank managers
get their task within the framework of achieving the common goal.
And within these frameworks, you can act relatively freely.
But your higher-rank manager should make sure that you,
first of all, do not go beyond these frameworks,
otherwise you will invade the sphere of action of another unit, another manager.
And, on the other hand, the final result that you get
is the necessary intermediate part of the final result
for which the production is organized.
The next point Foyol addressed has become very popular today.
Foyol called it the unity of leadership.
In fact, today this idea is called the unity of the team of managers,
or the unity of the top management,
depending on the sphere, the area of action in which it is spread.
Foyol drew attention to the fact that in the beginning it is important,
but the situation is much worse when there is no agreement among the higher management.
The higher management is responsible for very large production areas.
The head of the site is responsible for the work of 5-10 machines.
We have thousands of machines.
Of course, some chaos will appear if he starts to engage in his own activity,
but still, this is not a catastrophic chaos.
If a disagreement appears at the highest level,
then there may be difficulties between two rather serious parts of the business,
which will definitely lead to the breakdown of all existing systems and relations.
As a result, we will get not what we wanted, if we get anything at all.
As you can see, Foyol looked ahead for almost 50 years.
This is shown in the table we looked at.
The next point Foyol highlights is the subordination of personal interests to the common.
Again, this is an obvious point.
The fact is that every person has his own tasks, interests and approaches.
But he came to the organization, to the company, which implements certain tasks.
And here you have to integrate your individual qualities into the common goal.
In fact, in this case, Foyol is running very far ahead.
This subordination of personal interests to the common is what is called team building today.
This is very much in demand.
Moreover, the wider the production area, the more people are engaged in it,
the more important is the issue of team building.
Foyol, like Taylor, again came from the practice.
He was engaged in analysis and study of work in large enterprises and factories.
He drew attention to the fact that if there is a problem of unity,
if there is a common goal that is shared by the workers,
the results are much better.
This is a very important result of Foyol,
because it will be the basis of the next direction of the school of human relations.
But again, Taylor also talked about this.
Foyol just highlighted this situation and brought it to the foundation.
The next principle that is important for management in Foyol is the reward of staff.
Foyol, of course, talks about the material reward.
If you have achieved the plan, you will receive the appropriate reward.
If you have overcompleted the plan, you will receive the appropriate reward.
If you have not completed the plan, there should be some sanctions and fines.
But again, we need to figure it out.
Foyol highlighted the reason for not completing the plan.
Maybe the plan was overcompleted, and it was not your fault.
It was the wrong management who planned it.
Then you should be punished, but not you, but the managers who planned it.
So, the reward problem is what we call material stimulation today.
Foyol, of course, talked about material stimulation.
But, as Taylor, Foyol also pointed out that not everything is measured by material stimulation.
In fact, Foyol's approaches in his management methods include protection, including non-material stimulation.
Again, this should not be surprised, because what concerns Taylor, Foyol and other authors,
about whom we will talk today, they did not create their approaches from the head, not from theory, but from practice.
And that's why they left their name in the history of management,
that they were able to capture the main points that arise.
In addition to material stimulation, a person is interested in reward,
and not always in a purely monetary way.
The same authority, the same respect.
Foyol noted this, but still, the majority of people do it on material stimulation.
The next principle that Foyol talks about is the centralization of management.
An important principle from which point of view?
Foyol noticed that very often managers become too many.
And, of course, every person thinks of himself as a boss, feels power as control, forgets about responsibility.
And the problem arises that there are too many bosses, and it's difficult to negotiate with each other.
And the boss has his tasks, his managerial functions, not just executive.
And in this regard, the abundance of leadership, the abundance of managers is the starting point
that can lead to a split within the business.
That's why Foyol says that a centralized management system should be built
in order to get rid of extra managers, of extra workers, of the saving of jobs.
This is the problem that was solved a long time ago.
This is what Taylor was doing, creating his chronometry, creating his instructions.
And the task was that the less we hire workers, the less we pay, the more profit we have at the output.
Foyol set the same task for the applicant managers.
The more managers, the bigger the problem.
That's why we need to find an optimal number of managers, depending on the volume of production,
depending on the tasks that are set.
And in every particular case, which Foyol considered in every particular factory,
he calculated the corresponding results.
The next thing Foyol paid attention to was the principle of justice.
There are different theories of motivation, including the theory of justice,
which is that the same work should get the same reward.
That is, it shouldn't be that two people do the same work, get the same results,
but get a two or three times higher material reward.
Foyol paid attention to the fact that people are very sensitive to the fair attitude to themselves.
If I make some efforts, if I make any actions,
I want these actions to be noticed, approved, so that my initiative is in demand,
my initiative gets a certain rating.
In this regard, Foyol paid attention to the fact that the reward for the work should be fair.
In the sense that for the same results, for the same actions, we should get the same reward.
In addition, Foyol paid attention to the need for order in official duties.
That is, Foyol says that when a person comes to work,
whether he is a worker or a manager, he should be familiar with his official duties.
What are his duties, what will he be asked for, and what rights does he have?
What right does he have to ask?
It is not possible for a person to come to work, or rather to a managerial job,
and not know the limits of his authority,
not know the sphere of influence he has the right to exert,
and where the limits of responsibility of another person are.
In order to avoid misunderstandings, scandals, and divisions between managers,
there should be order, that is, there should be regulations in the sphere of actions,
in the sphere of responsibility of each manager, for which he is responsible.
The next principle that Foyol highlights
is that it is necessary to ensure the stability of the workplace for the staff.
This is what is characterized by the phrase confidence in the future.
I am a manager, I am a manager, a professional in my field.
I was hired to work for an organization of some business processes.
At the same time, I must be sure that this is not a temporary organization for me,
that this is the organization in which I will continue to work.
If I start to cope successfully with the tasks I am assigned,
it will ensure my career growth as a manager.
Accordingly, the stability of the workplace leads to the fact
that I will be interested in working in this company, in working informally.
If I consider it as a temporary place, or I do not associate with this company
the principal ideas and views of my future,
then my attitude to work will be appropriate.
At the same time, Foyol draws attention to the need to cultivate initiatives.
Initiatives not only for the workers, but also for the managers.
Again, with all the restrictions that we talked about,
both in the presence of a single beginning and in the presence of a scalar chain of management,
in this case it is about the fact that there is a sphere for which I am responsible.
And in this sphere I can carry out an initiative,
I can optimize the working conditions,
I can make some rationalization proposals that, in my opinion, will lead to improvement of the results.
But Foyol emphasizes that any initiative must be responsible.
For example, there is already a certain established production process.
I make changes, thereby I change and violate the existing system.
Of course, the result can be much better, and then my initiative will be justified.
But on the other hand, my initiative may not be justified enough.
And in this sense, the introduction of changes in the production process leads to a failure of production.
So, the initiative must have reasonable limits.
And again, as for this initiative, it must be implemented taking into account all the tasks,
all the principles that are before production.
Well, another point that Foyol highlights and that should be stopped
is what Foyol himself calls the corporate spirit.
Here again Foyol jumps very far ahead.
Because at the beginning of the 21st century, in our modern business,
the corporate spirit is the education that is worth the price.
It is loyalty to the staff, it is the creation of a staff reserve,
it is the provision of staff growth within the organization,
it is the team formation, it is the unity of the team.
It is all the corporate events, corporate meetings, corporate trips.
It is all that creates a certain corporate spirit.
It is all that is hidden under the brand of a particular company.
And the main idea here is that the emphasis is on the attitude of the company to the person.
A person ceases to be a simple screw.
A person realizes his importance and importance in the company.
He understands that his experience is valued.
And if it is appreciated, if it is noticed,
a person is naturally interested in the further application,
in the further development of his abilities within the framework of this company.
Of course, Fayol did not describe all this in detail.
But the general idea of this corporate spirit,
laid down by Fayol in the 1920s,
has found a wide range of distribution,
both today and in the subsequent development of the classical management school.
In principle, Taylor also talked about this, but he said in general terms.
Fayol formulates this more specifically.
And Fayol begins to introduce this corporate spirit into production,
creating different kinds of working groups.
And then, when we talk about modern tenancy management,
we will stop at the corporate spirit separately.
But it comes up to Fayol as a person who began to introduce this
and apply it in different areas of management.
Again, I think these principles are enough to understand
the basic positions of the classical direction.
There may be others.
But you can familiarize yourself with them in the literature proposed.
These are the principles that have a significant impact
and influence on the modern state of management.
The next school, which is a natural continuation of the classical ideas of Fayol,
is the so-called school of human relations.
Look, as we list the principles we have just discussed,
we see that, having begun subjective management, responsibility, economic results,
Fayol is getting closer and closer to taking into account subjective or human factors.
In fact, Fayol prepares the ground for management
and pays more attention to the human qualities and human traits of the employees,
the staff they manage.
Again, we should pay attention to the fact that the school of human relations
has been developing since the 1930s,
almost in parallel with the classical Fayol school.
If we go back to the slide about the evolution of the management thought of the modern age,
we see that the difference appears at the age of 15.
But the classical school and the school of human relations are practically in sync.
The classical school dealt with the problem of management as such,
from the point of view of managing the results of the system,
social-economic, social-technical systems, and obtaining the final result.
As for the school of human relations,
it actually focuses its main attention on people, on staff,
on those human, subjective, passionate, qualitative, ambitious desires,
opportunities that a person has to achieve the final result.
But the school of human relations in management
is concerned with the development of the system of relationships between people
and the management of this system.
As for the school of human relations,
its development begins with the famous Hathorov experiments,
which were conducted at the Western Electric plant in America, in the city of Hathorov, starting in 1927.
This experiment was conducted by a large group of scientists,
among them were Fritz Lisberger, Elton Mayo, Edith Dickson, and others.
But usually this field is associated with the name Mayo.
Although, maybe this is not entirely fair,
because Mayo was one of the participants who did a lot,
but still one of the organizers of this department was Fritz Lisberger.
However, I think this is already a recognition of the merit of priorities,
which is more important for the academic tradition.
We are interested in the results.
As for the results obtained during the Hathorov experiments,
it was proven and demonstrated that when we deal with economic relations,
when we deal with the management system,
objective indicators play a significant role.
And when we deal with business, we should, of course,
be significantly more focused on objective indicators.
We are interested in the economic results we have obtained.
We are interested in our place in the market.
We are interested in how the investments we have made have been repaid.
But this is the result.
This result is realized during a certain process.
The production process, the service delivery process,
the organization itself,
and the same people, the same staff,
the managers, take part in this process.
And as for this school,
the main focus in this case was on the fact that
in addition to the formal organization,
I am the manager, you are my subordinate,
you should perform my tasks,
there is also the informal relationship,
the informal organization,
which is often much more significant,
much more important,
much more perceptive,
and much more significant for the final result
than the whole structure of the formal organization.
People work,
and people work,
and an informal relationship arises between them.
You can formally sit from 9 to 6,
and at the same time you can get a much better result,
depending on your motivation,
your desire, your needs,
your loyalty,
your prospects that you see in this organization
or in the organization of competitors.
And accordingly,
the motivation of your activities that arise in you
largely depends on the subjective features of a person.
We formulated it as a classical doctrine of human relations.
Everything I just said is related to this doctrine.
And being a psychologist, a social psychologist,
we found that the main feature of any organization,
the main driving force of any organization
is the people who work in it
and the relations between people in this organization.
If these are cooperative relations,
positive relations,
then the results will be significant,
and the criteria that will be obtained will also be excellent.
If these relations are competitive, aggressive, conflictive,
then whatever investments you make in production,
whatever modern equipment you buy,
you will not get results that are significantly different from the results of competitors.
I would also like to draw your attention to the fact
that the Khator experiments were carried out in 1927-1932,
in the 20th century.
In fact, it was the time of the Great Depression.
First of all, the question was whether the organization would survive,
and secondly, whether production would be enough to sell certain products
that would be possible to sell in the conditions of reduced purchasing power of the population.
So, when we formulated this doctrine of human relations,
it was based on the fact that
the whole basis of this school, this direction of management,
is that a person is a social being.
Again, let's remember the definition of management that we gave.
We always talk about social, economic, and social-technical systems.
In fact, this is a tribute to the school of management,
to the school of human relations.
Indeed, a person is a social being,
that is, he is oriented to the behavior of other people,
and included in the context of group behavior.
This is a very important aspect.
Because if you are in a collective,
where there is a cool relationship with the leadership,
then your initiative may have completely different relations and consequences
in terms of your socialization in this collective.
If the staff members are in bad relations with their leader,
and you are trying to build business relations with him,
then you may be subject to group ostracism,
that is, you will be isolated within your group,
and naturally, when you are in isolation,
it will be hard for you to work.
And instead of working, you will be immersed in small conflicts,
that is, you will do anything but work.
This is what we pay attention to.
And this is what we pay attention to.
Again, the fact is obvious.
Taylor pointed it out, and Fayol talked about it.
But it is we who put these facts, these events,
in the basic position of our concept, the concept of management,
and focus and pay attention to this very fact.
At the same time, in the doctrine of human relations,
great attention is paid to the fact that
we should associate human psychological features
with the management aspects that arise.
But it is emphasized that human nature is incompatible
with the strict hierarchy, with the bureaucracy that exists in any organization.
This is the 1930s, the 20th century,
the period of established capitalist production
with all its tendencies that exist now.
So, what concerns these tendencies is the hierarchy.
There is a boss, there are subordinates, there are deputies,
there are interns, there are assistants, there are secretaries,
there are referents, there is a certain procedure for passing documents
in order to get the necessary signature.
You must get different visas, legal, financial, accounting,
economic, industrial and economic.
And only after you have received all the visas
can you submit a paper for the signature of the boss.
Getting a visa is a long-term process.
It happens that the paper gets to the boss only in a week or two,
or it won't get there at all because someone will wrap the paper somewhere.
Very often lawyers like to do this.
And, accordingly, while you are making changes,
the time will pass.
I think that the situation today has not changed at all
since the middle of the last century,
because large corporations are especially active in this.
If the corporation is medium or small,
then the boss is in the zone of direct visibility, direct contact,
and here we can get the result quickly.
Although the consequences can be different.
But if there is a company with already established internal regulations,
internal regulations,
then getting a basic signature there is a long-term procedure.
In the 1930s, we noticed that this bureaucracy
is incompatible with human desires, with human nature.
And in this case we are talking about the results
that can be attributed to management.
Because this bureaucracy, when we talk about management,
is manifested primarily.
There are some written and unwritten management norms.
You can't jump over your head,
you can't bypass your boss, and so on.
And all this must be taken into account
if you really want a conflict-free existence
and a resulting existence, both for yourself and for the company.
The next thing that we pay attention to in the Doctrine of Human Relations
is that the managers of enterprises, managers of different branches,
should be guided to a significant degree
to meet the needs of people.
Because if you are guided only to technical factors,
improving machines, their modernization,
acquiring new capacities, it's all good.
But these capacities are a set of hardware, a set of machinery.
Only when someone who can work on this hardware is suitable.
Only then.
He produces something on it, and only then it is returned.
You can buy the most wonderful modern computer
with a huge number of capabilities,
a huge hard disk,
a huge RAM,
and sit and play Tetris on it.
It happens very often, by the way,
when the needs of the hardware
are much greater than the tasks that are set by the people working on it.
Then the question arises,
why invest additional funds
and acquire those technical capabilities
that are redundant for solving business tasks,
for solving those management tasks that arise before me.
We paid attention to this.
In fact, if we buy a particular hardware,
we should take care of it,
to interest people to work on this hardware,
and not to spend time on it.
If you want to be an effective manager,
you should keep this in mind.
Secondly, you should organize training of staff to work on this hardware.
And again,
you should start from the fact that a person has different needs.
When a new hardware is bought, I can be afraid that I won't be able to work on it,
and I will be fired, and someone else will replace me.
This is a great need to keep a job,
and this is a need that I want to work here.
This is a need that can be developed.
This is a need that can be emphasized.
And when you buy a particular hardware,
you should take care that a person does not have fear of work,
of this most perfect hardware at the moment,
but that he has a desire to work on it,
and, accordingly,
to contribute to the fact that the efforts put in by a person were noticed,
were rewarded, were set as an example.
These are the 30s of the 20th century, when we are talking about it.
And, of course, in the future, this has been used very, very many times.
This problem has become especially popular today.
And when we talk about the current trends in management,
we will pay attention to this.
Another thing that can be said about human relations,
is that we are dependent on management.
In this case, we are talking about what?
In fact, again, the same theory, the idea of justice, which Foyol introduces.
But in this case, we emphasize that the productivity of labor,
and it is very important to keep in mind the manager who organizes the corresponding process,
will be more effective if the individual reward is supported by the group.
For example, there is a certain project group,
which is aimed at achieving a certain result.
People make different contributions to achieving this result,
and the result will be achieved.
Naturally, someone contributed more, someone less.
This achievement must be evaluated.
But then you can organize competitions between different groups,
and the group that achieved the best results can get an additional reward.
How will they distribute it?
This is the job of the group leader.
But in this case, my individual reward is equal to the group's reward.
And I understand that, yes, I have a significant contribution to solving the problem.
But if there were no support from my colleagues,
if there were no contribution from them, I would not have achieved the result.
This is the informal organization of labor,
which is the doctrine of human relations that exists.
It is important for us to contribute to each person,
but a person is a social being, and we work together with other people.
So we need to take this social reward into account.
This is a confirmation of group activity and group significance.
I, as a member of a successful group,
this is, again, the task of motivation,
which is widely spread today in different concepts of motivation,
in the theory of MacLeland, in the theory of Herzberg, in the theory of oil and others.
But it was me who practically justified this result
and got experimental data,
on the basis of which all these theories of motivation were subsequently developed.
So, this is what concerns the school of human relations
or the doctrine of human relations,
which today is an integral attribute of any concept of management.
So, we have gradually reached the middle of the 20th century,
if we look at our original slide on the evolution of governance thought in the 20th century.
And now we will stop and consider the approaches in management that exist.
This is a quantitative approach, a systematic approach, a situational approach and an organizational approach,
which is currently the most fashionable, although perhaps the most indisputable.
But we will consider this when we come to this organizational approach.